So far, we have described the amplitudes and the instantaneous feel strength of the wave, which can
be a positive or negative number if its value is above or below the X axis.
This could be also the value of the electric or magnetic field vector.
Or or the value of any wave in this case, the FT amplitude can't be taken as a measure of the intensity
of a light ray.
However, and we have already seen this in a previous lecture when we discussed the double slit experiment,
we can take just the amplitude and this expression, this mathematical expression of a wave as its intensity,
since a negative intensity is not very meaningful.
Therefore, what is defined in physics as in the intensity of light beam, that kind of stimulus we
can perceive with our eyes must always be positive and in physics corresponds to the square models of
the field, the square.
Most of the models of the wave function is what we call the intensity, or as we will, shall see also
the probability, density, probability of an event in quantum mechanics to take place.
And for the same reason, a squared models of a complex number as we have seen previously, Furnaces
furnishes the squared rate vector length gives us.
Our capital are there vector, the squared model of a complex wavefunction, gives always the squared
amplitude of the wave like here.
So if we have the same wavefunction, complex way function bpci x t.
Which gives us the value of a wave in a point in space X at time T, if we take off this, the complex
modulus squared models, we obtain the model squared of the amplitude of the wave, how big the wave
is.
And it is this general quantity that is defined as the intensity of the wave and it is independent from
any space position.
Time, instant or initial phase.
Finally, just a note.
Uh, we have already seen how waves add together, add or subtract together, and we have the interference
phenomenon.
We have seen this in the double slit experiment and in the lectures which described the.
Tomas Young Dubbers little experiment, so go back to that lecture.
I do not go into the details again, but just to remind you that this mathematical procedure is used
to calculate interference phenomena, what one does is you take two waves, for example, or so many,
many more.
But let's do it with two waves.
You have, say, one side to add them together, obtain another wave, which is, however, can we have
positive as negative values so that this does not represent an intensity, a physically detectable real?
Phenomenon we make, however, the model square of this to added functions and obtain the interference
pattern.
I just wanted to remind you what we did in the lecture previously, and so this might clarify this further.
A final mathematical identity, and that is is a bit tricky, but will turn out to be useful is that
of the intensity function resulting from a generic addition of two wave to complex ways.
So one answer to that is the square models offered some as this one that you can see here, we take
the model square of Siwan plus side two, which means for the definition of how a complex conjugate
is defined and also because of the binomial theorem binomial law that we have to multiply this parenthesis
here.
So one plus BPCI, two times the complex conjugate.
So one start to start.
Then using the distributive distributive law, you get one townsite, one start plus one to start,
plus apply to say one star plus PERTZYE to say two star.
And if you look you see that want say one star is just the definition of the model.
The square of one side to say two star is the definition of the model, the square of cyto.
And then there is a remaining term which is the interference term.
These two first one usually then in physics say one model the square plus SPSSI two Model Square are
the intensities here.
This last term is what is called also the interference term.
And that we will we are we have discussed or if it didn't get there, you will see that determines the
interference fringes in the experiment of the double slit experiment or many slit experiment.
This last term turns out, because if we will, the complex waves as say one equals x1 plus I y one
and two equals x2 plus I imagine an imaginary number y two as we know, because it's just we know these
are complex numbers.
Then you have to write this middle term here, this term in the center.
Uh.
Again, you rewrite it, remember to make the complex conjugate, it means that we insert here the minus
sign and you rewrite this term here and you get you have to make all the calculations.
And what you get is this this result.
It is a little bit cumbersome calculation, but just take a piece of paper and and make all the steps,
read all the steps down, you will get this expression here two times x1 x2 plus two times Y one y two.
And you can check that.
In fact, this is two times the real part of BPCI one stop side two, or if you prefer, two times the
real part of one side to start, just check it.
But what what is what the important thing is, is to remember beyond these algebraic details that this
is the interference term between two interfering ways or also between two interfering quantum states.
One of the basic conceptual pillars of calculus is the concept of the derivative of a real or complex
function.
Broadly speaking, it is that quantity which tells us how sensitive to change a function is in its input,
values and intuitive way to grasp the essence of the of the derivative is to think of our everyday notion
of speed.
We measure the speed of an object as the rate of change of its position in space over time.
The function would be, in this example, a position function as in time parameter Denay as of the speed.
The velocity V V of T in time is its derivative because it says something about the rate of change of
S in T.
Generally speaking, assuming only real numbers for the sake of simplicity here, if we plot the graph
of a function F against its variable X in an X Y Cartesian coordinate system such as Y equals F of X,
then the derivative of the function measures the rate at which the value Y of the function changes with
respect to the change of the variable X.
It is called the derivative of F with respect to X.
Graphically, it represents the slope of the function at each point.
Let us take as an example, the slope of a linear function, the graph is just a straight line, as
in this figure here in the in this case, the slope M is defined as the change in Y over the change
in X and which symbolically due to this graph here means Y two minus one.
Divided X two minus X one, and which usually usually is.
Written in a more compact form as Delta Y over Delta X.
This can be extended to any function if we consider the infinitesimal change of a function in Y along
the Y axis denoted as the Y means a little bit, uh, for an infinitesimal change in X a little bit.
You change, you move around along the x axis, denoted that as the X, then the slope M becomes an
infinitesimal quantity as well in the sense that it expresses the slope of the function that is its
derivative.
Exactly in that point as the gradient, the inclination, the slope of the tangent line in X, and that's
what we can see here in this more general, uh, picture of you are you have a function which is not
necessarily a linear function, just a curve.
And in one point X you determine the slope.
And this turns out to be the tangent line in X of F and which is written in the notation introduced
by Leibnitz.
Uh, with the prime one denotes the derivative operator, the symbol D as F prime of X equals the the
the F of X over there X equals also the over the the X times F X that these are interchangeable symbolics.
And in any case you read this as F prime of X.
For multiple variables, functions such as F, X of X, Y, Z and so on, there exists also the partial
derivative, the symbol of the differential operator.
Becomes Delta instead of the year that Delta here and of F with respect to X or with respect to Y or
with respect to that charter, and it is written, uh, if we chose that differential along only one
direction, let's choose X as ephriam of X of X, Y, Z equals the delta of X over Delta X equals Delta
over Delta six times F of X.
These are again interchangeable symbolics.
Not that one can conceive of the derivative or differential as represented by the action of operators.
We have the operators, the over the X or Delta, over the X respectively, and we conceive that as
operating on the function F.
This operator notion is central and is a central object in quantum mechanics, and we will see this.
Moreover, of course, it is possible to conceive of multiple derivations differentiations.
The second derivative of a function is the derivative of a derivative of it's not only two times the
multiple derivatives and derivative is a derivative of the derivative of the derivative of Syria.
And times in general, one writes for the end of the derivative or differentiation operator.
The.
Power and over the ex power and or the same with the Delta Simbo.
So returning to our previous example, the speed of a body whose movement is described by the function
S of T.
Or enty in space is a derivative.
V of T equals the S of T of ADT.
And by the way, the acceleration A is a second derivative, that is the rate of change of the speed
or the velocity.
Think of it, the acceleration is just the change of speed as the speed is a change in space.
The acceleration is a measure of the change of the velocity of the speed or the speed.
And therefore we ride A of T equals the.
Secondary, simply second derivative of s in time.
Of course, this gives you only a very superficial and intuitive notion of.
Calculus elements of and of what it's all about, calculus textbooks on college textbooks, on calculus
are 500, 2000 pages thick.
So we cannot do justice to this.
However, for our purposes, this glimpse is sufficient.
With this, we have gone through the most difficult and hard part of this short and little mathematical
primer I placed here in the appendix of this course, we have only to take a quick look at the concept
of the integral.
A long and articulated introduction to differential integral calculus would be needed to describe satisfyingly
what in an integral of a given function is in mathematics here, not at all rigorous and quite sloppy
and only intuitive description will be given, generally speaking, and integral in a two dimensional
space is a measure of the area.
A, that a given function F of X and closes the X axis over an interval A P.
Symbolically, it is written as this one here, a integral from A to B of F X, the X with the X as
tells us along which Axis one is integrating.
And graphic graphically, it represents the shaded area in this figure, similar definition holds also
for the integration in a three dimensional space or eventually even also in an N dimensional space with
three, four, five, six, seven and more dimensions.
This is, however, only a very general understanding of the notion of an integral.
The coordinate axis must not necessarily represent space coordinates.
For example, the x axis could represent the flow of time in the Y axis, a power consumption of an
electric device, for example.
When Tiger offered over a time interval would furnish the total energy consumption, then in this specific
example, another practical example which might be useful to introduce us intuitively to the application
to the application of integrals in quantum mechanics could be the calculation of the mass of the mass
distribution in a body of volume V and density function roll over X, Y and Z.
The three dimensional density function tells us how dense the body is at a specific location at a point
in X, Y, Z, in some density units say grams over cubic centimeters or kilograms or cubic meters and
so on.
Then the overall mass of the body is given by the three dimensional integral over all the volume V of
the density function, as you can see here.
So you have a triple intriguer integral over the X, the Y that set because we are in a three dimensional
space.
And of course, also the density function must be something that describes the density in a point inside
a body with the three coordinate.
What will turn out to be of particular interest for our purposes is the integration of the wave function.
More precisely, a squared modulus model squared modulus of PSI X and which is a probability, a probability
density in the area gives us the probability that a quantum phenomenon takes place.
For instance, you want to know what the probability is to find a particle in the interval A, B from
A to B., you have to take the wave function of this particle size.
X makes a model square and integrate it over this interval.
And then you get that probability to find that the particle inside that interval.
More on that in the lectures about the wave function that the liberally wavefunction Dirac Formalism,
Bonnaroo and so on.